---
author: "Chris Gray"
status: ReviewLevel2
---

# Using Personas to help shape your journey in DynamicTelemetry

DynamicTelemetry is a complex and highly technical subject that can be
challenging for various job positions to navigate.

By framing the book with personas, I aim to facilitate your focus on the most
relevant content while allowing you to bypass information that is not
immediately of interest. This approach should streamline the discovery of
pertinent information.

The personas are based on fictional job descriptions that reflect my experiences
at Microsoft. They represent the target audiences for this book. I will endeavor
to develop these personas and highlight common needs, confusions, preferences,
and pain points.

In the context of DynamicTelemetry, personas can be particularly beneficial in
guiding users to find specific information. Given the extensive and technical
nature of the topic, the vast amount of existing technologies, the design
patters, and the core technical principles - you'll realize how it is to become
overwhelmed by the details.

I encourage you to utilize these personas when designing and architecting key
components of DynamicTelemetry. This practice will help ensure that the content
remains focused and relevant to our shared target audiences, preventing the
book, accompanying websites, and supplementary software from becoming too broad
or unfocused. Consequently, it will be easier for our readers to locate the
information they seek.

I will strive to use these personas as an organizational tool to structure the
content effectively, providing a framework for determining which topics and
ideas should be included and how they should be presented.
