# The Observer Effect, in Telemetry

The observer effect in physics refers to the phenomenon where the act of
observing a system inevitably alters its state. This effect is often due
to the instruments used for measurement, which can interfere with the
system being observed. A classic example is the double-slit experiment
in quantum mechanics, where the presence of a detector changes the
behavior of particles.

Telemetry involves the collection of data that can influence the system
being monitored. One of the main risks of telemetry is the potential for
reliability and performance issues, as without care, its possible for
the telemetry itself to negatively influence the performance of the
system -- and in some cases even create crashes or failures. Both
telemetry and the observer effect demonstrate the balance between
gaining insights and the unintended consequences of measurement.

Comparing the two, while the observer effect is a fundamental concept in
physics that underscores the limitations of measurement at a quantum
level, telemetry\'s risks are more practical and immediate, impacting
system performance and reliability. In both cases, the challenge lies in
minimizing the impact of observation to ensure accurate and reliable
data collection. Techniques such as using less intrusive measurement
tools in physics or implementing robust privacy safeguards in telemetry
can help mitigate these risks.

Different probes used in telemetry and diagnostics come with their own
set of risks. For instance, **dynamic probes** in DynamicTelemetry can
introduce performance overhead, potentially affecting the system\'s
efficiency and reliability. These probes gather minimal amounts of
memory and transform them into standard OpenTelemetry Logs, which can
then be fed into existing telemetry pipelines. However, the process of
setting up these probes, such as using software or hardware breakpoints
may not always align with security and privacy guidelines.

Lastly, the **impact on system performance** is a significant concern.
Probes, especially those that enable CPU sampling or induce memory
dumps, can introduce latency and affect the overall performance of the
system This is particularly true for **actions** that involve diagnostic
operations, which, while not altering the system state, can still impact
performance. Therefore, it is essential to balance the need for detailed
telemetry with the potential performance costs.


